FITBUDDY AI – PROJECT DOCUMENTATION

ABSTRACT

FitBuddy AI is a web-based intelligent fitness and wellness assistant designed to provide personalized guidance based on user-provided information such as fitness goals, activity preferences, experience level, and physical limitations. The system combines a user-friendly web interface with artificial intelligence capabilities to generate personalized fitness recommendations and supporting content. A key feature is the use of generative AI for producing context-aware responses and, where configured, visual content that helps users understand recommended activities.
The application follows a simple workflow: the user enters profile and fitness information, the application validates the input, an AI service processes the request, and the generated recommendation is presented through the application interface. The system also collects an important safety-related input asking whether the user has health problems or physical limitations. This allows the application to treat such information as a constraint when forming recommendations. FitBuddy AI is intended as an educational and wellness-support application and not as a replacement for professional medical or fitness advice.
The project demonstrates the practical integration of web development, Python-based backend development, API-based generative AI, input validation, prompt engineering, and user-centered design. It can be extended with authentication, progress tracking, wearable-device integration, nutrition planning, multilingual support, and improved safety controls.

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
Fitness applications have become common tools for people who want to improve physical activity, establish exercise routines, and maintain healthy habits. However, a large number of applications provide fixed plans or require users to manually select routines. An intelligent assistant can make the interaction more adaptive by interpreting user requirements and generating content dynamically.
1.2 FitBuddy AI Overview
FitBuddy AI is designed as a personalized fitness and wellness assistant. The system accepts user inputs through a web form and uses artificial intelligence to generate recommendations. The application emphasizes personalization rather than presenting the same routine to every user.
1.3 Motivation
                   *Provide beginner-friendly fitness guidance through a simple interface.
                   *Reduce the effort required to design a basic personalized routine.
                   *Demonstrate practical use of generative AI in a student software project.
                    *Consider user-reported physical limitations as part of the recommendation context.
                    *Create a platform that can be extended with additional wellness features.
2. PROBLEM STATEMENT
Users have different fitness goals, activity levels, available time, preferences, and physical constraints. Generic exercise plans may therefore be unsuitable for individual users. A system is needed that can collect relevant information, interpret the user's requirements, and generate a personalized response in an understandable format. The system should also clearly communicate that AI-generated recommendations are not a medical diagnosis or a substitute for professional advice.
3. AIM AND OBJECTIVES
3.1 Aim
To design and develop FitBuddy AI, a web-based intelligent assistant that generates personalized fitness and wellness guidance using user inputs and generative artificial intelligence.
3.2 Objectives
                 *Develop a simple and responsive web interface for collecting fitness-related user information.
                  *Validate required form inputs before processing requests.
                  *Use AI to interpret user goals and constraints.
                  *Generate personalized workout or wellness recommendations.
                *Support AI-generated visual content where the configured AI service provides it.
                 *Provide safety-aware handling of reported health problems or physical limitations.
                 *Design the application so that future modules can be added without major redesign.
     *Evaluate the system using functional, usability, validation, and AI-output test cases.

4. SCOPE OF THE PROJECT
              * Users profile and fitness requirement collection.
              *Personalized exercise recommendation generation.
              *Goal-based fitness guidance.
              *Consideration of reported limitations as recommendation constraints.
              *Generative AI-based text responses.
              *Optional generation or presentation of exercise-related visual content.
              *Web-based deployment using a Python backend.
Future integration possibilities for nutrition, progress, and wearable data.
The current academic prototype focuses on recommendation generation and the core user interaction. It does not claim to diagnose diseases, prescribe treatment, or replace a qualified healthcare or fitness professional.
5. EXISTING SYSTEM
5.1 Common Existing Approaches
                   *Static workout plans published in websites or applications.
                  *Rule-based fitness calculators with limited personalization.
                  *Video libraries where users manually select exercises.
                   *Fitness applications that require extensive configuration before producing a plan.
5.2 Limitations of Existing Approaches
                     *Limited adaptation to individual requirements.
                      *Large number of choices can confuse beginners.
                      *Static content may not match the user's exact goal or experience level.
                   *Manual plan selection requires more user effort.
                   *Some systems do not explicitly collect physical limitation information.
6. PROPOSED SYSTEM
The proposed FitBuddy AI system combines a web form, backend processing, and generative AI. The user enters the required information, including fitness objective and whether any health problem or physical limitation is present. The backend converts this information into a structured AI request. The AI-generated response is then displayed in a readable format.
Figure 6.1: Proposed System Flow
[ USER ]
?
[ Fitness / Profile Form ]
?
[ Input Validation ]
?
[ Python Backend ]
?
[ Prompt Construction ]
?
[ Generative AI Service ]
?
[ Recommendation / Visual Content ]
?
                           [ FitBuddy AI Web Interface ]
7. FEASIBILITY STUDY
Feasibility
Assessment
Technical
The system can be implemented using a web frontend, Python backend, and an AI API. These technologies are widely used and suitable for a student project.
Economic
The prototype can be developed using free/open-source development tools. AI API usage may depend on the selected provider and quota.
Operational
The interface is designed for simple user interaction and requires only basic fitness information.
Schedule
The modular architecture allows development in stages: UI, backend, AI integration, testing, and documentation.
8. REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
8.1 Functional Requirements
                 *The system shall display a fitness information form.
                 *The system shall accept user fitness goals and relevant profile inputs.
                 *The system shall ask whether the user has health problems or physical limitations.
                 *The system shall validate mandatory fields.
                 *The backend shall construct an AI request from validated information.
                 *The AI service shall generate a personalized response.
                 *The system shall display the generated recommendation to the user.
                 *The system may generate or present supporting exercise visuals when enabled.
                  *The system shall provide safety-oriented messaging for limitation-related inputs.
8.2 Non-Functional Requirements
                   *Usability: the interface should be understandable to first-time users.
                   *Performance: normal requests should return within a reasonable time subject to AI API latency.
                   *Reliability: invalid inputs should not crash the application.
                    *Maintainability: frontend, backend, and AI integration should remain modular.
                    *Security: API keys and secrets should not be hard-coded into public frontend files.
                    *Scalability: the architecture should permit additional modules.
                    *Privacy: user information should be minimized and handled appropriately.
8.3 Hardware Requirements
Component
Minimum Requirement
Processor
Dual-core processor or better
RAM
4 GB minimum; 8 GB recommended
Storage
At least 1 GB free for project dependencies
Display
1366 × 768 or higher recommended
Internet
Required for external AI/API requests


8.4 Software Requirements
Software
Purpose
Windows / Linux
Development operating system
Python 3.x
Backend development
FastAPI / Python web framework
API and backend layer, where configured
HTML5
Page structure
CSS3
Styling and layout
JavaScript
Client-side interactions, where used
Generative AI API
AI-generated recommendations/content
VS Code or similar IDE
Development
Web browser
Testing and usage

9. TECHNOLOGIES USED
Technology
Role in FitBuddy AI
HTML
Creates the user interface structure.
CSS
Provides visual design, layout, and responsive styling.
JavaScript
Supports browser-side interaction where required.
Python
Implements backend logic and AI request processing.
FastAPI / Uvicorn (if configured)
Serves the Python web application/API.
Pydantic / Settings management
Validates structured data and manages configuration when used.
Generative AI model/API
Produces personalized natural-language recommendations.
Image generation service/model (if enabled)
Produces supporting exercise visuals.
Git
Version control and source management, if used.

10. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Figure 10.1: Three-Layer Architecture
+-----------------------------------------+
¦ PRESENTATION LAYER ¦
¦ HTML + CSS + JavaScript ¦
+-----------------------------------------+
¦ HTTP Request
?
+-----------------------------------------+
¦ APPLICATION / BACKEND LAYER ¦
¦ Python + API Routes + Validation ¦
+-----------------------------------------+
¦ Prompt / API Request
?
+-----------------------------------------+
¦ AI SERVICE LAYER ¦
¦ Generative AI / Optional Image Service ¦
                  +-----------------------------------------+
10.1 Data Flow
               *User opens the FitBuddy AI application.
               *The application displays the fitness information form.
               *The user enters required information.
               *The browser submits the request to the backend.
                *The backend validates and normalizes the input.
                *A structured prompt is generated.
                *The AI service processes the prompt.
                *The backend receives the AI response.
                 *The result is formatted for the user interface.
          *The user views the personalized recommendation.
11. SYSTEM DESIGN
11.1 Use Case Description
Actor
Use Case
Description
User
Enter Profile
Provides basic information required for personalization.
User
Select Goal
Chooses the intended fitness objective.
User
Report Limitation
Indicates whether a health problem or physical limitation exists.
User
Request Plan
Submits information for AI processing.
System
Validate Input
Checks required fields and acceptable values.
AI Service
Generate Recommendation
Produces context-aware fitness/wellness guidance.
System
Display Result
Shows the generated output to the user.

12. MODULE DESCRIPTION
12.1 User Input Module
Collects the information needed to personalize the recommendation. A typical form can include fitness goal, experience level, preferred activity, available time, and a health-problem/physical-limitation field.
12.2 Validation Module
Checks whether required fields are supplied and whether selected values are valid. Validation reduces incomplete requests and prevents avoidable backend errors.
12.3 Prompt Construction Module
Converts structured user information into a clear AI instruction. The prompt can specify the user's goal, level, constraints, desired output format, and safety guidance.
12.4 AI Recommendation Module
Sends the prepared request to the configured generative AI service and receives the generated response.
12.5 Visual Content Module
Where image generation is enabled, the module can request or present exercise-related visual content to improve understanding.
12.6 Result Presentation Module
Formats the AI response into readable sections such as warm-up, main activities, repetitions/duration, cool-down, and safety notes.
13. AI AND PROMPT ENGINEERING
13.1 Role of Generative AI
Generative AI allows FitBuddy AI to create a response from the combination of user requirements rather than selecting only from a fixed list. This makes the application flexible for different goals and experience levels.
13.2 Prompt Structure
SYSTEM ROLE:
You are a fitness and wellness assistant.

USER CONTEXT:
Goal: {goal}
Experience: {experience}
Available time: {time}
Preferences: {preferences}
Physical limitations: {limitations}

TASK:
Create a clear, beginner-friendly recommendation.
Respect the supplied limitations.
Include warm-up, main activity, cool-down and safety guidance.
Do not diagnose medical conditions or claim to replace professional advice.
13.3 Prompt Engineering Principles
                   *Provide clear role instructions.
                   *Include only relevant user context.
 *State safety constraints explicitly.
 *Specify the desired structure of the answer.
  *Use simple language suitable for the intended user.
   	   	  *Avoid requesting unsupported medical conclusions.
  *Use consistent output formatting so the frontend can present results clearly.
14. DATABASE AND DATA DESIGN
The core prototype can operate without a permanent database if user information is processed only for the current request. If persistence is required, the following logical design can be used.
Entity
Important Fields
Purpose
User
user_id, name, age, experience
Stores user profile information if accounts are implemented.
FitnessProfile
profile_id, user_id, goal, preference, availability
Stores fitness preferences.
Limitation
limitation_id, profile_id, description
Stores user-reported limitations with appropriate privacy controls.
Recommendation
recommendation_id, user_id, content, created_at
Stores generated recommendations if history is enabled.
Feedback
feedback_id, recommendation_id, rating, comment
Stores user feedback for improvement.
14.1 Data Minimization
Only information necessary for the requested functionality should be collected. If persistent storage is added, sensitive health-related information should be protected, access should be limited, and retention should be defined.
15. USER INTERFACE DESIGN
15.1 Home / Introduction Screen
The landing area introduces FitBuddy AI and explains that the application provides AI-assisted fitness and wellness guidance.
15.2 Fitness Information Form
The form is the primary interaction point. It should use labels, dropdowns, radio buttons, or text fields where appropriate. Required fields should be clearly identified.
15.3 Physical Limitation Field
Do you have any health problems or
physical limitations?

[ No ? ]
[ Yes ]
If the user selects Yes, the application should collect only the additional information needed for safe personalization and should encourage professional guidance where appropriate.
15.4 Result Screen
Personalized plan heading.
Warm-up section.
Main activity section.
Cool-down section.
General safety notes.
Optional AI-generated visual content.
Option to return and revise inputs.
16. IMPLEMENTATION
16.1 Project Structure
FitBuddy/
¦
+-- app/
¦ +-- main.py
¦ +-- routes/
¦ +-- services/
¦ +-- templates/
¦ +-- static/
¦ +-- css/
¦ +-- js/
¦ +-- images/
¦
+-- .env
+-- requirements.txt
+-- README.md
The exact directory structure may vary depending on the final implementation. Secrets such as API keys should be kept in environment variables or a secure secret manager rather than committed to source control.
16.2 Backend Processing
1. Receive form/API request
2. Validate request fields
3. Normalize values
4. Build AI prompt
5. Call configured AI service
6. Validate/format response
7. Return result to frontend
16.3 Configuration
# Example only
AI_API_KEY=<store-secretly>
AI_MODEL=<configured-model>
The actual variable names and model configuration should match the implementation. The values above are illustrative and should not be treated as credentials.
17. ALGORITHMS AND WORKFLOW
17.1 Personalized Recommendation Algorithm
  		Start.
Collect user fitness information.
Check mandatory fields.
Read the selected fitness goal.
Read experience level and available time.
Read preferences and limitation information.
Construct a structured prompt.
Send the prompt to the configured AI model.
Receive the generated recommendation.
Apply output formatting and safety checks.
Display the result.
Stop.
17.2 Flowchart
Figure 17.1: Recommendation Flowchart
+---------+
¦ START ¦
+---------+
?
+------------------+
¦ Enter user data ¦
+------------------+
?
+----------------+
¦ Valid input? ¦
+----------------+
NO¦ ¦YES
? ?
[Show error] [Build prompt]
¦
?
[Call AI service]
¦
?
[Format result]
¦
?
[Display plan]
¦
?
+------+
¦ END ¦
+------+
18. TESTING
Testing verifies that the interface, backend, validation, AI integration, and result presentation work together correctly. Because AI output is probabilistic, AI testing should focus not only on exact text matching but also on safety, relevance, structure, and adherence to user constraints.
18.1 Functional Test Cases
Test ID
Test Case
Expected Result
Status
TC01
Open application
Home/form page loads successfully.
Pass / To verify
TC02
Submit empty required fields
Validation message is displayed.
Pass / To verify
TC03
Submit valid fitness data
Request reaches backend and result is displayed.
Pass / To verify
TC04
Select physical limitation = No
Request proceeds using normal constraints.
Pass / To verify
TC05
Select physical limitation = Yes
System handles limitation information and includes safety context.
Pass / To verify
TC06
AI service unavailable
User receives a controlled error/fallback message.
Pass / To verify
TC07
Very long input
Input is constrained or safely handled.
Pass / To verify
TC08
Refresh/result navigation
Application remains stable.
Pass / To verify
18.2 AI Output Test Cases
Test ID
Scenario
Check
AI01
Beginner goal
Response should be simple and progressive.
AI02
Short available time
Plan should respect stated time constraint.
AI03
Physical limitation reported
Output should acknowledge constraint and avoid unsafe recommendations.
AI04
Unclear request
System should ask for clarification or produce a cautious response where appropriate.
AI05
Irrelevant prompt injection
System should prioritize application instructions and safety constraints.
18.3 Performance Testing
The application should be tested under normal and repeated requests. API response time depends on network conditions and the selected AI provider. The backend should use timeouts and controlled error handling.
19. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The FitBuddy AI prototype demonstrates how a web application can collect structured fitness inputs and use generative AI to produce personalized content. The main benefit of the approach is flexibility: the same interface can serve users with different goals and preferences without requiring a separate hard-coded routine for every combination.
Area
Observed / Intended Result
User interaction
Simple form-based interaction for collecting fitness requirements.
Personalization
AI response is conditioned on user-provided context.
Safety awareness
Physical limitation information is explicitly collected.
AI integration
Backend can connect user requests to a generative AI service.
Visual support
AI-generated or selected visual content can improve exercise understanding when enabled.
Extensibility
Architecture can support future modules.
20. SECURITY, PRIVACY AND RESPONSIBLE AI
20.1 API Key Security
Never place private API keys directly in browser JavaScript.
Use environment variables or a secure secret manager.
Do not commit .env files containing real credentials to public repositories.
Rotate exposed credentials immediately.
20.2 User Privacy
Collect only necessary information.
Avoid storing health-related details unless there is a clear functional need.
Use access control if persistent user profiles are implemented.
Define retention and deletion procedures.
Avoid exposing one user's information to another user.
20.3 Responsible AI
Clearly identify AI-generated guidance as informational.
Avoid medical diagnosis or treatment claims.
Include appropriate caution for reported physical limitations.
Reduce misleading certainty in AI responses.
Provide a route to professional guidance for medical or injury-related concerns.
Test prompts and outputs for unsafe or irrelevant recommendations.
21. ADVANTAGES
Personalized recommendations.
Simple and accessible web interface.
Natural-language interaction through generative AI.
Potential visual support for exercise understanding.
Flexible architecture.
Can be expanded into a complete wellness platform.
Useful demonstration of modern AI application development.
22. LIMITATIONS
AI-generated recommendations may not always be correct.
The system depends on external AI/API availability where applicable.
AI output may vary between requests.
The prototype does not replace professional medical or fitness assessment.
Persistent progress tracking may require additional database and authentication work.
Image generation availability and quality depend on the selected service and configuration.
23. FUTURE ENHANCEMENTS
Secure user registration and login.
Personal dashboard with workout history.
Progress charts and achievement tracking.
Nutrition and meal-planning support.
Integration with wearable devices and activity trackers.
Multilingual support including regional languages.
Voice-based interaction.
Calendar-based workout scheduling and reminders.
Improved recommendation evaluation and feedback loops.
Exercise library with verified reference material.
Admin dashboard for monitoring system usage.
Deployment using cloud infrastructure with secure secrets management.
24. CONCLUSION
FitBuddy AI presents a practical approach to building an AI-assisted fitness and wellness application. The project combines web technologies, Python backend processing, structured input validation, prompt engineering, and generative AI to produce personalized guidance. The application is designed around a straightforward user experience while recognizing that physical limitations require additional care.
The project also demonstrates an important software engineering principle: AI should be integrated as one component of a controlled application rather than treated as an unquestioned source of truth. Validation, privacy, security, responsible prompting, error handling, and clear user communication are therefore essential parts of FitBuddy AI. With additional development, the prototype can evolve into a broader personal wellness platform.
25. REFERENCES
1. Python Documentation – Official Python language documentation.
2. FastAPI Documentation – Official FastAPI documentation.
3. Uvicorn Documentation – ASGI server documentation.
4. MDN Web Docs – HTML, CSS, and JavaScript reference.
5. Google Cloud / Generative AI documentation – AI and model integration concepts, where applicable.
6. Official documentation of the selected generative AI API/model used in the final implementation.
7. OWASP Web Application Security resources – general web application security practices.
8. Project source code and configuration files maintained by the development team.
26. APPENDIX
Appendix A – Sample User Input
Field
Example
Fitness Goal
General fitness
Experience Level
Beginner
Available Time
30 minutes
Preference
Home workout
Health Problems / Physical Limitations
No
Appendix B – Sample AI Output Structure
FITBUDDY AI – PERSONALIZED PLAN

Goal:
Experience:
Duration:

1. Warm-up
2. Main workout
3. Cool-down
4. General safety guidance
5. Progression suggestion

Note:
This is AI-assisted wellness information and is not medical advice.
Appendix C – Suggested Screenshots to Add
Home page / landing screen.
Fitness information form.
Health problem / physical limitation selection.
Loading or processing screen.
Generated recommendation screen.
Generated exercise image/visual, if enabled.
Backend terminal showing successful application startup.
AI/API configuration screen with all secrets hidden.
Replace the above placeholders with actual screenshots from the final FitBuddy AI implementation before submitting the report.
